README.md, before:

# A GNU libc interceptor via RTLD-Audit 

# WIP

This project is a *work in progress*. The implementation is *incomplete* and subject to change. The documentation can be inaccurate.

# Description

A GNU GLibc Audit shared-library for Linux using the RTLD-Audit mechanism in GLibc.

To see `make` targets, run

      make help

Much of the information about the GNU GLibc Audit is inside the source code for 
its dynamic loader at dlopen() time, `rtld.c`:

     https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=blob;f=elf/rtld.c#l1335
         
        ...
         // Follow the usage of audit_iface_names[] inside rtld.c for Audit API
         
         static const char audit_iface_names[] =
                     "la_activity\0"
                     "la_objsearch\0"
                     "la_objopen\0"
                     ...

which prepares for the use of the Glibc Audit inside the runtime-linker; and
inside the code of the dynamic-symbol actual usage (auditing) during execution,
`dl-runtime.c`:

     https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=blob;f=elf/dl-runtime.c#l383
         
       ...
       /* Follow the usage of the ARCH_LA_PLT* macros, which in turn are defined
        * in the header file:
        * 
        *    <glibc-source-code>/sysdeps/<mach-architecture>/dl-machine.h
        * 
        * for each architecture where GLibc has been ported to.
        * 
        * E.g., this code in ./elf/dl-runtime.c audits the "entrance" (calling) 
        * into the symbol "sym" in glibc:
        */
        ...  afct->ARCH_LA_PLTENTER (&sym, reloc_result->boundndx,
                                           ...
        

which defines the actual use of the Glibc Audit inside the runtime-linker. Also,
the interfaces for this mechanism,

     /usr/include/link.h
     /usr/include/bits/link.h

and the documentation in the `rtld-audit(7)` man page. E.g., below the comment 
in `/usr/include/link.h`:

     /* Prototypes for the ld.so auditing interfaces.  These are not
       defined anywhere in ld.so but instead have to be provided by the
       auditing DSO.  */
     ...

Note: the header `/usr/include/bits/link.h` shouldn't be explicity included
in your program, `/usr/include/link.h` includes it and 
`/usr/include/bits/link.h` errors out during compilation if 
`/usr/include/link.h` is also included:

     /usr/include/bits/link.h
       ...
       #ifndef _LINK_H
       # error "Never include <bits/link.h> directly; use <link.h> instead."
       #endif

The file `a_test.c` contains only a test (with a lot of memory-leaking) just to
see how the audit library reports it. You could use:

     export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=`pwd`
     LD_AUDIT=liba_glibc_rtld_audit_shared_lib.so.1.0.1 ./a_test

or alternatively:

     make  run_a_test

and you will see some lines like:

     1427243201.652328: Calling symbol malloc from address 4006a0 ... (RDI=10240, RSI=0, RDX=11725120, RCX=11725120...

where RDI, RSI, are the values of the CPU registers in the call to `malloc` above 
(e.g. in the above call to `malloc()`, the requested amount of memory is set in 
the register `RDI`, with value `RDI=10240` in the above line, so the call was 
`malloc(10240)`. See 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#System_V_AMD64_ABI 
on the passing of the actual arguments in a function call preferently through 
the CPU registers directly, avoiding if possible the stack, in Linux -and other 
Unix-like O.S.)

# Tracking Pending things

Trying to catch a logical bug in `la_x86_64_gnu_pltexit(...)` that is preventing 
its execution. `la_symbind64(...)` seems to prepare for `la_x86_64_gnu_pltexit(...)`
to prepare for `la_x86_64_gnu_pltexit(...)` to be called (as `la_x86_64_gnu_pltenter(...)`
is indeed invoked before each call, and both `*_gnu_pltenter()` and `*_gnu_pltexit()`
are expected to be quite orthogonal if `la_symbind64(...)` requests that they both be
invoked).

Read also the code around glibc's elf/dl-runtime.c

    https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=blob;f=elf/dl-runtime.c
								       
to see what is happening with the above invocation, and opened a bug:

      https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=18177

(other people has appended more details on the LD_AUDIT implementation in 
dl-runtime.c) but this bug seems to be unrelated to my logical bug 
described in the first paragraph that I'm still investigating here.

In the stack-backtrace of the caller-procedures, the unwind of the caller stack
is being done and shown on the caller stack of the Linux dynamic loader. This 
stack-backtrace has to fixed on the caller stack in `glibc` itself up to `main()`.
(It is using `libunwind`, not the default glibc `backtrace` because it is not 
Posix safe -namely, it is `AS-Unsafe init heap dlopen plugin lock` in the context 
where this tracer needs to use:

     libunwind:
     
         http://www.nongnu.org/libunwind/man/libunwind%283%29.html
     
     glibc bactrace safety by context:
     
         http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Backtraces.html
         http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/POSIX-Safety-Concepts.html

Another option for the stack-trace would be to use the `DynInst`'s `StackWalkerAPI`:

     http://www.dyninst.org/sites/default/files/manuals/dyninst/StackwalkerAPI.pdf

This stack-trace is in-core, for this shared-library runs under the same thread
and in the same memory space of the thread/process it is tracing, not an external
thread/process, so `libunwind-ptrace` (used by `strace`, `gdb`, and `ltrace`) 
seems to be too heavy-weight for this `same thread, same memory space` case, for
it uses the `ptrace` system-call and allows to backtrace externals `thread-ids`
-and it stops the external thread, etc:

     libunwind-ptrace:
     
         http://www.nongnu.org/libunwind/man/libunwind-ptrace%283%29.html
     
     underlying ptrace system-call:
     
         http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/ptrace.2.html

Commit message:

better a_test.c for stack-backtrace

README.md, after:

# A GNU libc interceptor via RTLD-Audit 

# WIP

This project is a *work in progress*. The implementation is *incomplete* and subject to change. The documentation can be inaccurate.

# Description

A GNU GLibc Audit shared-library for Linux using the RTLD-Audit mechanism in GLibc.

To see `make` targets, run

      make help

Much of the information about the GNU GLibc Audit is inside the source code for 
its dynamic loader at dlopen() time, `rtld.c`:

     https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=blob;f=elf/rtld.c#l1335
         
        ...
         // Follow the usage of audit_iface_names[] inside rtld.c for Audit API
         
         static const char audit_iface_names[] =
                     "la_activity\0"
                     "la_objsearch\0"
                     "la_objopen\0"
                     ...

which prepares for the use of the Glibc Audit inside the runtime-linker; and
inside the code of the dynamic-symbol actual usage (auditing) during execution,
`dl-runtime.c`:

     https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=blob;f=elf/dl-runtime.c#l383
         
       ...
       /* Follow the usage of the ARCH_LA_PLT* macros, which in turn are defined
        * in the header file:
        * 
        *    <glibc-source-code>/sysdeps/<mach-architecture>/dl-machine.h
        * 
        * for each architecture where GLibc has been ported to.
        * 
        * E.g., this code in ./elf/dl-runtime.c audits the "entrance" (calling) 
        * into the symbol "sym" in glibc:
        */
        ...  afct->ARCH_LA_PLTENTER (&sym, reloc_result->boundndx,
                                           ...
        

which defines the actual use of the Glibc Audit inside the runtime-linker. Also,
the interfaces for this mechanism,

     /usr/include/link.h
     /usr/include/bits/link.h

and the documentation in the `rtld-audit(7)` man page. E.g., below the comment 
in `/usr/include/link.h`:

     /* Prototypes for the ld.so auditing interfaces.  These are not
       defined anywhere in ld.so but instead have to be provided by the
       auditing DSO.  */
     ...

Note: the header `/usr/include/bits/link.h` shouldn't be explicity included
in your program, `/usr/include/link.h` includes it and 
`/usr/include/bits/link.h` errors out during compilation if 
`/usr/include/link.h` is also included:

     /usr/include/bits/link.h
       ...
       #ifndef _LINK_H
       # error "Never include <bits/link.h> directly; use <link.h> instead."
       #endif

The file `a_test.c` contains only a test (with a lot of memory-leaking) just to
see how the audit library reports it. You could use:

     export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=`pwd`
     LD_AUDIT=liba_glibc_rtld_audit_shared_lib.so.1.0.1 ./a_test

or alternatively:

     make  run_a_test

and you will see some lines like:

     1427243201.652328: Calling symbol malloc from address 4006a0 ... (RDI=10240, RSI=0, RDX=11725120, RCX=11725120...

where RDI, RSI, are the values of the CPU registers in the call to `malloc` above 
(e.g. in the above call to `malloc()`, the requested amount of memory is set in 
the register `RDI`, with value `RDI=10240` in the above line, so the call was 
`malloc(10240)`. See 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#System_V_AMD64_ABI 
on the passing of the actual arguments in a function call preferently through 
the CPU registers directly, avoiding if possible the stack, in Linux -and other 
Unix-like O.S.)

# Tracking Pending things

Trying to catch a logical bug in `la_x86_64_gnu_pltexit(...)` that is preventing 
its execution. `la_symbind64(...)` seems to prepare for `la_x86_64_gnu_pltexit(...)`
to prepare for `la_x86_64_gnu_pltexit(...)` to be called (as `la_x86_64_gnu_pltenter(...)`
is indeed invoked before each call, and both `*_gnu_pltenter()` and `*_gnu_pltexit()`
are expected to be quite orthogonal if `la_symbind64(...)` requests that they both be
invoked).

Read also the code around glibc's elf/dl-runtime.c

    https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=blob;f=elf/dl-runtime.c
								       
to see what is happening with the above invocation, and opened a bug:

      https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=18177

(other people has appended more details on the LD_AUDIT implementation in 
dl-runtime.c) but this bug seems to be unrelated to my logical bug 
described in the first paragraph that I'm still investigating here.

In the `stack-backtrace` of the caller-procedures, the unwind of the caller stack
is being done and shown on the caller stack of the Linux dynamic loader. This 
stack-backtrace has to fixed on the caller stack in `glibc` itself up to `main()`.
Ie., in the test program `a_test.c` in this repository, the stack-backtrace
shows the procedures `la_x86_64_gnu_pltenter` (itself) and `_dl_profile_fixup`
and `_dl_runtime_profile` beloging to the dynamic linker `/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so`,
which it should really omit them (`0`, `1`, and `2`) in the stack-backtrace:

     caller backtrace:
       0: 0x92b06229: la_x86_64_gnu_pltenter+0xde (./liba_glibc_rtld_audit_shared_lib.so.1.0.1)
       1: 0x23a0f83e: _dl_profile_fixup+0x3ce (/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2)
       2: 0x23a16c88: _dl_runtime_profile+0x8e8 (/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2)
       3: 0x40067f: test_function_inner+0x69 (./a_test)
       4: 0x4006b7: test_function_outer+0x20 (./a_test)
       5: 0x400740: main+0x87 (./a_test)

(It is using `libunwind`, not the default glibc `backtrace` because the latter
is not Posix safe in the context where this tracer needs to use -namely, `backtrace`
is `AS-Unsafe init heap dlopen plugin lock` in the context where this tracer 
needs to use it:

     libunwind:
     
         http://www.nongnu.org/libunwind/man/libunwind%283%29.html
     
     glibc bactrace safety by context:
     
         http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Backtraces.html
         http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/POSIX-Safety-Concepts.html

Another option for the stack-trace would be to use the `DynInst`'s `StackWalkerAPI`:

     http://www.dyninst.org/sites/default/files/manuals/dyninst/StackwalkerAPI.pdf

This stack-trace is in-core, for this shared-library runs under the same thread
and in the same memory space of the thread/process it is tracing, not an external
thread/process, so `libunwind-ptrace` (used by `strace`, `gdb`, and `ltrace`) 
seems to be too heavy-weight for this `same thread, same memory space` case, for
it uses the `ptrace` system-call and allows to backtrace externals `thread-ids`
-and it stops the external thread, etc:

     libunwind-ptrace:
     
         http://www.nongnu.org/libunwind/man/libunwind-ptrace%283%29.html
     
     underlying ptrace system-call:
     
         http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/ptrace.2.html
